
1

DAILY CLASS NOTES
Geography




 
2



Geomorphism (Part- 2)
Exogenic Forces:
	The forces that take place outside the Earth's surface are called Exogenic Processes.
	Forces responsible for Exogenic movements:
	The insolation from the sun is responsible for heat. This heating and cooling cause contraction and expansion of the rocks and lead to the
formation of cracks and loose material comes out. It will lead to breakage of rock and change the face, size, and configuration of the rock.
	This heat leads to wind movement, rainfall, chemical reactions, biological phenomena, and physical weathering.
Factors affecting the Exogenic processes:
1.	Climate: Climate is the sum total of weather conditions over a large area for a long period of time which is more than thirty years. It includes various agents like seasons, insolation, winds, temperature, and rainfall, which help in the process of denudation.
2.	Rocks type: Different types of rocks offer varying resistances to various geomorphic processes. The faults and cracks in the rocks result in easy breakage of rocks into small particles. The softness, hardness, inclination, and orientation of rocks (rock slides) of rocks decide the rate of disintegration of rocks.
Denudation:
	All the exogenic geomorphic processes are covered under the term, denudation.
	The term 'denude' means to strip off or to uncover. Hence denudation means removing the top layer of the earth's surface or stripping off the material cover.
	It includes weathering, mass wasting/movements, erosion, and transportation. These all remove the top layer/cover and change the face and configuration of the earth.
	Weathering is the result of the action of elements of weather and climate over the earth's materials.
	Winds, rainfall, flood water, cyclone, and hail storms can be the reasons for denudation.
Types of Denudation Processes:
1.	Erosion: Erosion is the process of removal of topsoil from any field by external forces such as rain, wind, etc. It involves the acquisition and transportation of rock debris.
	A massive rock breaks into smaller fragments or particles through weathering and other agents like, running water, groundwater, glaciers, wind, and waves remove and transport it to other places depending upon the dynamics.
 
3



2.	Mass Movements: Mass movements is the movement of the rocks, boulders, sand, and particles down the slopes.
	It transfers the mass of rock debris down the slopes under the influence of gravitational force. Example: Landslides, avalanches, debris flow, etc.
3.	Weathering:
	It is the mechanical disintegration and chemical decomposition of rocks through the actions of various agents like weather and climate.
	It is a phenomenon of mechanical disintegration (breaking into small parts) and chemical decomposition due to physical factors (pressure, temperature) and chemical processes (oxidation, reduction, hydration) of the earth's relief features and materials.
	In this process there is very little or no motion of materials takes place, therefore it is an in-situ or on-site process.
	It is conditioned by several complex geological, climatic, topographic, and vegetative factors.
	There are three major types of weathering processes : (i) chemical weathering (chemical reaction) (ii) physical or mechanical weathering (Temperature and pressure) (iii) biological weathering processes (due to biological organisms- plants, animals, etc).
a.	Physical weathering happens due to the action of temperature and pressure stress (internal resisting forces). For example, It causes cracks in the rocks.
b.	Chemical weathering happens due to the action of chemical reactions such as the action of water and carbon dioxide on the rocks. It may be in the forms of hydration, solution weathering, carbonation, oxidation, or reduction.
c.	Biological weathering happens due to the action of termites, bacteria, fungi, plants, animals, etc.
Factors Influencing the Weathering:
	Geological Structure:- the structure of rocks, endogenic forces, etc.
	Climate:- Temperature, dry or arid, etc.
	Topography: Land is Plain or hill, etc.
	Natural Vegetation Significance Of Weathering:
	It is responsible for the formation of soils and erosion and deposition.
	The biodiversity of a region is basically depending on the depth of weathering.
	Weathering also aids mass wasting, erosion, and reduction of relief and changes in landforms.
	The weathering of rocks and deposition helps in the enrichment and concentrations of valuable ores of iron manganese, and aluminum copper.
 

 

Difference between Physical, Chemical, and Biological Weathering:

PHYSICAL	BIOLOGICAL	CHEMICAL
Thermal changes: Repeated temperature change, stress develops, and rocks crack and split. (onion peeling/ exfoliation)	Burrowing	and	wedging	by organisms like earthworks termites	Dissolution; dissolving action of water and various organic acids.
Frost	action:	sharp	angular fragments of rocks are formed	Rodents help in exposing the new surfaces to chemical attack and assist in the penetration of moisture and air	Hydrolysis;	reaction	with hydrogen in air or water
Physical	Biological	Chemical
Pressure release
--	Oxidation; Reaction of oxygen in air or water with minerals in the rock
Hydraulic action; repeated wetting and drying stress	--	Solution
Hyaloclastite;	mechanical weathering	--	Hydration
--	--	Carbonation


Types of Physical Weathering:
Exfoliation: It is the process in which large flat or curved upper sheets of rock gets fractured and detached from layers of rocks.
	Exfoliation due to Pressure Release:
	The intrusive rocks formed deep beneath the Earth's surface are under tremendous pressure due to the overlying load of the above rock.
	The removal of the overlying rock load/material due to erosion causes vertical pressure release and freeing up of the bottom rocks (which expands due to pressure release).
	The upper layers of the rock continue to expand and result in the disintegration of rock masses.
	The fractures in the rocks will develop nearly parallel to the ground surface.
 
5



	In the areas the ground surface is curved or arched tends to produce massive sheets or exfoliation slabs of rock.
	The exfoliation sheets resulting from expansion and pressure release may expand up to hundreds or even thousands of meters horizontally.
	The large, smooth, and rounded domes formed due to exfoliation are called exfoliation domes.
	The loose materials of the rocks will flow due to wind and water.
	Exfoliation due to Thermal Effect:
	The rocks are subjected to heat in the daytime.
	Various minerals in rocks have their limits of expansion and contraction and with the rise in temperature, every mineral expands.
	Because of insolation the top layer of rock heats up and expands. It exerts pressure on its surrounding rocks.
	As the temperature falls the rocks cool down and contract during night.
	The  differential  heating  and  expansion  &
contraction of surface layers of the rocks lead to the formation of thermal stress. It results in heaving and fracturing of the rocks.
	In this process the top layer of the rocks breaks down and with time due to winds and rainfall, loose material of the rocks is removed in the form of mud.
	Due to exfoliation in some rocks such as granites, the surface becomes smooth. The rounded (small or big) boulders are called tors.
	This process is most effective in dry climates and high elevations where diurnal temperature changes are very high.
	Exfoliation due to Granular Disintegration:
	This process occurs in the rocks which are composed of different types of coarse-grained minerals.
	The rocks are composed of different types of dark and light-colored minerals.
	Due to heat and temperature, light color minerals rocks absorb less heat and expand less compared to dark color grains (dark-colored grains as they expand more). This leads to tension and results in the development of cracks and breakage of rock.
	After some time, the dark-colored minerals rocks separate from the rock. The cracks of the rocks expanded and lead to the separation of the loose material in the form of sand and small rocks, which are called granules. This process is called as exfoliation due to the granular disintegration.
	Because of differential disintegration the weathering process takes place.
	This type of weathering takes place in cold regions and locations situated at high altitudes.
 
6



	Frost weathering:
	It occurs due to the formation of ice within pores and cracks of rocks during repeated cycles of freezing during the night and melting during the daytime.
	The volume of ice is more than the volume of water, so ice expands and results in the disintegration of the rock.
	This force of ice expansion is very powerful, its resulting expansion continuously, and with time the small intergranular fractures become wider and ultimately breaks apart the rock.
	This process is most effective at high elevations in mid-latitudes where freezing and melting are common. The glacial areas are subject to frost wedging.
	In this process, the rate of freezing is important, rapid freezing of water causes sudden expansion.
	Freeze-Thaw Cycle: It is the continuous expansion (freezing) and contraction (converting into water) of water inside the rocks is called the freeze-thaw cycle.
	The repeated freeze-thaw cycles weaken the rocks which, over time leads to breakdown of rocks into small pieces.
	The process of the splitting of rocks along the joints into blocks is called block disintegration.
	Freeze wedging is caused by the repeated freeze-thaw cycle due to which the cracks filled with water and subsequent freezing and thawing results in disintegration.
	Rock shattering: Continuous severe frost can disintegrate rocks along weak zones to produce many small angular pieces with sharp corners and edges through the process of shattering.
	It breakdown the rocks completely. The shattered piles up of rock fragments are called scree.
	These are generally found at the foot of mountain areas or along slopes.
	Salt Weathering:
	Salts in the sea rocks have some water in it, because of insolation water evaporates and salt gets heated up and expands (due to thermal action, hydration, and crystallization).
	Several salts like calcium, sodium, magnesium, potassium, barium, etc. have a property to expand.
	The rate of expansion of salts depends on temperature and their thermal properties.
 
7



	The expansion of salt leads to disintegration and breaks the rocks.
	Salts in rocks expand due to the thermal expansion causing the splitting of individual grains within rocks and eventually breaking the rock.
	It is a slow process and occurs in areas with frequent wetting and drying conditions which favors the salt crystal growth. The high temperature ranges (between 30 and 50 degrees Celsius) in desert areas favor salt expansion. The materials like sodium chloride and gypsum in desert areas heave up overlying layers of materials and result in the development of polygonal cracks all over the heaved surface.
	Due to the crystallization of the salt, chalk breaks down most readily, followed by limestone, sandstone, shale, gneiss, and granite, etc.
Chemical Weathering Processes:
	It is the chemical decomposition of rocks due to the action of chemical reactions.
	Carbonation, hydration (action of water), oxidation, and reduction leads to chemical weathering processes through chemical reactions by oxygen, surface, and/or soil water and other acids.
	Oxidation:
	Oxidation means a reaction of a mineral with oxygen to form oxides or hydroxides.
	This process occurs in rocks where there is ready access to the atmosphere and oxygenated waters.
	Red soil appears in red color because of the presence of iron oxide.
	The minerals most commonly involved in this process are iron, manganese, sulphur, Aluminium, etc.
	Iron rods and aluminum rods disintegrated and weakened because of the oxidation process. The red colour of iron upon oxidation turns to brown or yellow.
	Sulphur oxide leads to acid rain which leads to a reaction with material and its disintegration. Example: Taj Mahal etc.
	In the process of oxidation rock breakdown due to the disturbance caused by the addition of oxygen.
	If the oxidised minerals are placed in an environment where oxygen is absent, the process of reduction takes place. Such conditions exist generally in areas where the water table is low (in areas of stagnant or waterlogged ground).
	Due to the reduction the red colour of iron turns to greenish or bluish-grey.
	These weathering processes are interrelated, hydration, carbonation, and oxidation go hand in hand and hasten the weathering process.
	Carbonation:
	Carbonation is the reaction of carbonate and bicarbonate with minerals.
	In this process there is a formation of carbonates and bicarbonates and carbonic acids. It is a common process helping the breaking down of feldspars and carbonate minerals
	Carbon dioxide from the polluted atmosphere is mixed with the water, forming carbonic acid (acts as a weak acid).
 
8



	Carbonic acid mixed with the rain leads to acid rain which when falls on the limestone (calcium carbonate) leads to the formation of sinkholes.
	Calcium carbonates and magnesium carbonates are dissolved in carbonic acid (that forms Calcium bicarbonate) and are removed in a solution without leaving any residue resulting in cave formation. (Example: Karst topography).
	The carbonation process speeds up with a decrease in temperature. The colder water holds more dissolved carbon dioxide gas. Therefore, this is a very common feature of glacial weathering.
	Hydration: In this process chemical addition of water takes place.
	Several minerals take up water and expand and cause an increase in the volume of the material or rock.
	The process of hydration (the chemical addition of water) involves the rigid attachment of H+ and OH- ions to the atoms and molecules of a mineral.
	When water gets on the surface of rock it reacts with rock or material and forms hydroxides.
	Calcium sulphate on the reaction with the water turns into gypsum, which is more unstable than calcium sulphate.
	This process is reversible and its long, continued
repetition causes fatigue in the rocks which may lead to disintegration of the rocks.
Solution Weathering:
	This type of weathering occurs when the solvent is an acidic solution rather than simple water.
	The plants during the phase of growth expand their roots inside the landforms which leads to the formation of acid.
	The natural reaction of roots with moisture, temperature, and pressure forms acid.
	This acid reacts and dissolves rocks, minerals, and sand around the roots.
Biological Weathering:
	It is the process of the contribution or removal of minerals and ions from the rocks and its physical changes due to the growth or movement of organisms.
 
9



	Lining organisms such as rodents (rats, lizards, gecko), worms, termites, and bacteria remove the material on the roots of the trees, which help in the exposure of new surfaces to chemical attack and assists in the penetration of rainwater and air.
	Several organisms create favorable conditions for weathering.
	Mosses and lichens create a humid environment, which is favorable for fasting the chemical reaction (decomposition) and promotes bacterial action.
	Roots of the plants create pressure on the soil and move the soil aside, creating places for water and air (physical weathering).
	In the absence of oxygen, organisms in groundwater decompose and starts the process of reduction. The decaying plant and animal matter helps in the production of humic, carbonic, and other acids that enhance the solubility of some elements.
	Human beings also help by disturbing vegetation, ploughing, and cultivating soils. It helps in mixing and creating new contacts between air, water, and minerals in the earth's materials.

