Online Transactions: When the online transactions are issued during the day time, by the various branches, the transactions
 hit the Day Database, and also refer to the Day Database, for data. 

Call for Backup: In the evening the syncing of the Day database and Reference database is started.
 In this procedure, the two databases are brought to pair. 

Region Switch: This takes place usually at 21:30 hrs. After the Region Switch, the transactions start
 hitting the Night Database, i.e. updates are made here. However, the data is referred from the Day database, only. 

Pre-EOD Backup: After the Day and Reference databases are in pair, the syncing is over. However, the 
2 databases need to be split, so that updations made to one database are not reflected in the other. After splitting, 
the Pre-EOD backup is said to have completed. And the EOD procedure can be proceeded with. ]

DB Switch: But before starting the EOD, the database to be referred is switched, so that any table 
being updated during EOD is not referred to by any transaction from outside. So after DB switch, the DB being 
referred to is Reference DB, the transactions are hitting the Night DB. And the Day DB is ready for EOD updation jobs. 

EOD: During EOD, the major database updations are performed by IN0800 (INVM table) and BR0501 
(BORM table). So after, these jobs are over, we can again switch the DB, which is being referred. 

DB Switch: After BR0501 is over, the DB is switched, so that now, the DB being referred is again
 the Day DB and the DB being updated is the Night DB. 

Post-EOD Backup: After the DB switch is done, Post-EOD backup is started. Again the Day and 
Reference DBs are brought to pair, so that they contain the same data. 

SOD: By the time, Post-EOD backup is in progress, the EOD is over. After the Day and Reference 
DBs are in pair, again they need to be split. After the splitting is over, the Post-EOD backup is 
said to have completed, and Migration followed by SOD can be proceeded with. 

Region Bounce and Region Switch: After the SOD is over, the region is bounced to bring the queues 
in the Day region up, so that they are capable of accepting and processing transactions, 
as the region is switched. The night transactions are reposted from the Night DB to the Day DB,
 as soon as the region is switched back, so that now, the transactions are hitting the Day DB 
 (i.e. updating the Day DB) and also referring the same for data. 

Reposting is the technique by which the transactions that happen in the night, are fired as fresh transactions


 in the day as soon as the region is switched from night to day after SOD in the morning.
